== FREEBAYES ==

Overview:

FreeBayes is a Bayesian genetic variant detector designed to find small
polymorphisms, specifically SNPs (single-nucleotide polymorphisms), indels
(insertions and deletions), and MNPs (multi-nucleotide polymorphisms) smaller
than the length of a short-read sequencing alignment.  It uses short-read
alignments (BAM files) for any number of individuals from a population and a
reference genome to determine the most-likely combination of genotypes for the
population at each position in a reference genome (FASTA).  It reports
positions which it finds to be more likely polymorphic than monomorphic in a
standard variant interchange format (VCF).


Compilation:

FreeBayes requires g++ and the standard C and C++ development libraries.

    % make && sudo make install

Will build and install the executable freebayes to /usr/local/bin, as well as
the utilities bamfiltertech and bamleftalign.


Usage:

In its simplest operation, it requires only two inputs: a FASTA reference
sequence, and a BAM-format alignment file sorted by reference position.  For instance:

    % freebayes --fasta-reference h.sapiens.fasta NA20504.bam

Will produce a VCF (Variant Call Format [1]) file on standard out describing
all SNPs between the reference and the alignments in NA20504.bam.  In order to
produce correct output, the reference supplied must be the reference to which
NA20504.bam was aligned.

Users may specify any number of BAM files on the command line.  FreeBayes uses
the BamTools API [2] to open and parse these files in parallel, virtually
merging them at runtime into one logical file with a merged header.  (When
provided multiple input files, the input to freebayes is the same as the output
of the bamtools merge utility.)

For a more detailed description of available command-line options, run:

    % freebayes --help


Calling variants in a population:

FreeBayes is designed to be run on many individuals from the same population
(e.g. many human samples) simultaneously.  The algorithm exploits a neutral
model of evolution and allele diffusion to impute most-confident genotypings
across the entire population.  In practice, the quality and confidence in the
callset will increase if you run multiple samples simultaneously.  If your
study has multiple individuals, you should run freebayes against them at the
same time.

To call variants in a population of samples, the only requirement is that each
alignment has a read group identifier attached to it, and that the header of
the BAM file in which it resides has a mapping between read groups and sample
names.  A script, scripts/sam_add_rg.pl, is included to add RG tags to BAM
files which were generated without this information.  If you have many files
corresponding to many individuals, add a unique read group and sample name to
each, and then open them all simultaneously with freebayes.  The VCF output
will have one column per sample in the input.


Usage, advanced:

FreeBayes can read BAM from standard input (--stdin) instead of directly from
files.  This allows the application of any number of streaming BAM filters and
calibrators to its input.  Two filters are of particular interest:

    1) base alignment quality (BAQ) adjustment, a quality smoothing filter
    which applies a hidden markov model of read genesis to each alignment
    independently.  This is currently implemented by samtools fillmd.  (See
    Biological Sequence Analysis Probabilistic Models of Proteins and Nucleic
    Acids by Durbin et. al. for more details.)

    2) read-independent left realignment of indels.  Aligners may position gaps
    in reads inconsistently despite the fact that the indels represent identical
    variation.  By realigning insertions and deletions as far left as they will go
    without introducing mismatches between read placement and reference, we can
    evaluate

For example, you can apply BAQ adjustment region 10:6000..7000 to a set of BAM
files using this pattern:

    % bamtools filter -region 10:6000..7000 -in NA20504 -in NA20507.bam \
       | samtools fillmd -Aru - reference.fasta \
       | freebayes --stdin -f reference.fasta

Using this pattern, you can filter out reads with certain criteria using
bamtools filter without having to modify the input BAM file.  You can also use
the bamtools API to write your own custom filters in C++.  An example filter is
bamfiltertech (src/bamfiltertech.cpp), which is provided here to filter out
technologies which have characteristic errors which may frustrate certain types
of variant detection.


Usage, indels:

FreeBayes has been tested as an indel caller in conjunction with Mosaik [4],
which uses a seeded Smith-Waterman-Gotoh algorithm for alignment.  In
principle, any gapped aligner which is sensitive to indels will produce
satisfactory results.

When calling indels, it is important to homogenize the positional distribution
of insertions and deletions in the input by using left realignment.  This can
be done in a streaming fashion as in this indel detection example:

    % bamtools filter -region 10:6000..7000 -in NA20504 -in NA20507.bam \
       | bamleftalign -f reference.fasta \
       | samtools fillmd -Aru - reference.fasta \
       | freebayes --stdin \
                   --region 10:6000..7000 \
                   -f reference.fasta \
                   --indels \
                   --report-all-alternates \
                   --use-all-alleles

(Note that BAQ is applied after realignment.  Also note the --indels flag,
which is required for indel detection.  Also, when supplied a --region
specifier but reading from stdin, freebayes will not report sites outside of
the target region, which may occur as bamtools filter emits all reads which are
partially overlapping the target region.)

Left realignment will place all indels in homopolymer and microsatellite
repeats at the same position, provided that doing so does not introduce
mismatches between the read and reference other than the indel.  By default
freebayes only analyzes up to 2 potential alleles, and only reports one
alternate.  This behavior will cause problems with the detection of indels in
large populations, as indel alleles of different lengths tend to cluster in
repeating segments, and will consequently be realigned to the same position.
In this example, --use-all-alleles allows the analysis of all potential alleles
at each site, and --report-all-alternates reports all of them in the VCF file
(one per line, which is nonstandard, but much easier for post-processing
applications).

Indel detection using left realignment is not perfect, as some classes of
indels, such as non-homologous insertions in repetitive sequence, are not
presently handled.  However, this method computationally inexpensive and
handles the most common classes of alignment inconsistency.


Author: Erik Garrison <erik.garrison@bc.edu>
        Marth Lab [3], Boston College

License: MIT

References:

[1] http://www.1000genomes.org/wiki/doku.php?id=1000_genomes:analysis:vcf4.0
[2] http://sourceforge.net/projects/bamtools/
[3] http://bioinformatics.bc.edu/marthlab/Main_Page
[4] http://bioinformatics.bc.edu/marthlab/Mosaik
